---
layout: post
title: A long wait to freedom
---
## *This is a little long piece but worth it*



<center>
Also required because no one tells us how to deal with a failure. Though the way society
defines success and failure is very vague but unfortunately we have to live in this society
itself.
</center>

<p></p>

<center> A long wait to freedom</center>

So sorry! Its RBI’s loss! There is always a next time! It’s just an exam, life is way bigger. Life is
full of opportunities……….

Gosh such assurances and solace from peers’ sound so obscenely shallow and dried of
meaning howsoever well intended they might be when your name doesn’t appear in that
coveted final list.

It was the evening of 19th when I was randomly surfing net to read about the consecutive
victory of JASCINDA ARDERN in NEW ZEALAND elections riding on the popularity of being
one of the best managers of the pandemic in the world. (Notably all chest thumping
megalomaniac leaders across the world have failed miserably in managing the health &
socioeconomic catastrophe unleashed by the virus.)

Involuntarily my hand clicked the result page of RBI, which I had bookmarked since 12th, the
day last interview got over. Usually the page showed “No results here” but at that moment I
cursorily glanced that another line was added below it. My heart skipped a beat and I
immediately knew the results are out. With a lump in throat, butterflies in belly and tremors
in fingers I clicked it. It downloaded immediately and I scanned it from top to bottom. Under
my regional office 5 roll numbers were displayed and one of them ended in 17. I vaguely
remembered it to be my roll number but suppressed the euphoria rising down my gut. I
wanted to be doubly sure. With great clumsiness I found my interview call letter to ascertain
my roll number only to know mine ended with 11.


Boom! A bomb exploded right beside me sending shivers down my spine making me numb
and deaf listening only a continuous beep. My state of mind became incoherent. I felt
paralyzed. Not knowing how to react I went out immediately in my society to take stroll.
Eyes welling up, a shriek constipated and stuck at throat, objects in front of me fading in and
fading out, the skyscrapers of my society appearing as evil monsters ready to devour me or
crash upon me. It felt as if someone has put a blender inside my gut and mind and churned
it full throttle. The gut wrenching contortions and vortex of inconclusive thoughts kept me
roiling. While I was walking my legs refused to be in sync and they literally dragged in a way
as if two quintal stones have been tied to them. For past few days I had been reading
English August (A novel by Upmanyu Chatterje) and felt as dejected, forlorn and
directionless as its lead protagonist Agastya. The mammoth difference being he felt so after
joining the prestigious IAS and I was feeling same despite being jobless. For me a lot was at
stake and so was the case with many more.


But all this gradually started subsiding and I regained a little composure. First thought was
my parents need to know this but didn’t know how to tell them. I called few friends but all
were genuinely busy somewhere. I called another candidate whom I met during interview
only to know he also couldn’t clear unfortunately. I won’t lie it felt good to hear that. Now
here is funny thing, pain or joy becomes bearable only if it is collective. The great thinker of
our times Yuval Noah Harari also says we as a human race are so advanced only because all
our actions are collective. In this world we all are connected in unimaginable ways.

Then came the call back of one of my friends whom I know since class six. He also was in
shock (Also hindi vala शोक, grief) knowing that I couldn’t make it. Then I called my mother
and simply told her in plain tremoring voice. The silence that followed from her side stabbed
me. I knew she still holds me in high regard not doubting my caliber but I could sense her
grief on why her child has to endure this. Also our parents are nearing the age when age
related insecurities start to creep in. Whenever I look at my mother I am reminded of a
poem “My Mother at Sixty Six” by Kamla Das that I read back in my school days. Knowing
that you somehow have caused a grief to dear ones (parents,siblings,girl/boyfriend,friends
or well wishers) puts you in quagmire. But such is life. Nothing here goes according to the
plan. Our best strategy should be to prepare for best response to the situations life throws
us in because we can’t control the situations but we may somehow control our responses
and that is what turns the tide ultimately in our favor.


Now why this piece is titled “A long wait to freedom”? Because whatever we desire in life
name, fame, money, dream job, love, relations, friendship e.t.c the underlying desire is of
liberation. We think if we achieve it would give us more degree of freedom. Well that is still
elusive for many of us while few of us are riding up the ladder of their career path switching
from one coveted to another prestigious job.

I slept over it and then the struggle behind the success stories and failure started to come in
the telegram groups. At the core of every story lied the fact that we all are equally
vulnerable, humane and imperfect. Someone wrote how he failed at 5th attempt and was
planning to get married to love of his life. Other member wrote how in a span of two years
he/she failed at interview stage of UPSC, RBI, PCS & NABARD. One mighty mam wrote how
despite being a mom of two and being a banker she managed to do this all gracefully for so
many years. I hold this lady in highest regard even higher than toppers because I have seen
from close quarters what it takes to be a banker mother. My motive of highlighting these
stories is not to trigger the same awful & distasteful trauma of that evening in the
concerned members but just want to tell that I feel you. We feel you. I know words sound
obscenely hollow but hold on tight guys and without sermonizing I just want to send you
tight comfy hugs.

Someone also made spiteful comment about reservation “baki seats reservation vale le gaye
honge”. Look sir/mam, grace is the virtue of true (wo)men and that is required if you are
aspiring to be an esteemed officer. Still I don’t wish to hurt you or trample upon your
freedom of expression but myself also being a general candidate I wish to make it amply
clear that reservation in Indian context is a right not ‘KHAIRAAT’. If you wish to remove the
reservation first remove the inequality that runs deep in our blood due to endless social
conditioning.

Now the maxim that times heal every wound is true. Is a Pankaj tripathi imaginable without
patience? What was Irrfan without patience? They gracefully accepted whatever came their
way and kept themselves indulged in “KARM”

धीरे धीरे रे मना धीरे सब कुछ होय
माली सीींचे सौ घड़ा ऋतु आए फल होय

Now I know these fancy quotes might not be relatable but what is our option other than to find meaning in it or imbibe it? It’s like if we are drowning in flood water we will hold on to first log which comes flowing
towards us rather than analyzing and judging whether the log would be able to bear our weight. The positive attitude is that log that we need to hold on to right now.

There comes a moment in our lives when we feel we are in middle of a storm, our ships are about to capsize ad we are losing the control of oars and ropes and exactly that precise moment is when we should give our all skill and strength. So my dear friends relax and hold on.

Also I would like to extend my heartfelt  congratulations to those who made it, sincerest gratitude to those who guided the whole lot with their selfless wisdom and the overall ambience of group where uninhibited bonhomie and comraderies brewed.

I am leaving you with this piece of poetry. Do listen to it.
https://youtu.be/PzS_2sHd19A

